Hello. Welcome. Thanks for coming. I am Phil, the Director of Pharma and Healthcare here
at Posit. I'm going to be helping to moderate the session today, so if you have any questions,
feel free to post those in YouTube as well in Slido. We'll put the link across the screen
now so you'll know how to get it. Very excited to bring to you today the sequel to the popular
Roche webinar that we hosted last year, where they discussed and mapped out the open-source
backbone for clinical trials. And today, we're going to continue Roche's journey and take
you through an application of that backbone for a complete R submission and the communication
and also the collaboration that they had with the regulatory bodies. We'll kick off the
presentation today with Ning Ling, Interim Global Head of the Data Science Acceleration
Enabling Platform, as well as Heinel Patel and Jingyuan Chen, both principal data scientists
working on the submission at Roche. Last year in the webinar, we covered the innovation
and strategy at Roche, detailing the vision to create this open-source backbone for clinical
reporting. And it detailed the statistical computing environments, the package development,
the upskilling, the workflow changes, and all the work that Roche had to do over the
years to do the submission that we're going to talk about today, all the while leading
and talking and contributing to efforts like R and Pharma, the R validation hub, the Pharmaverse,
the pilot submission, and the list goes on. And it's with great excitement to bring to
you today Roche's first end-to-end R-based drug submission. So with that, I'll pass it
over to Ning to start the webinar for today.
Thank you very much, Phil. I'm really, really happy to join my colleagues, Heinel and Jingyuan
today to share our exciting journey for our first end-to-end submission to health authorities.
So in today's presentation, we will start with myself, and I will start with introducing
our Roche version, especially explaining why we decided to move to open-source strategy.
And then following that, Heinel will join me and share her journey, her team's journey
as early adopters for those new tools. And then Jingyuan will join us to share the regulatory
submission journey from Roche. And after that, I will wrap up with a short reflection of
the past, the present, and also the future.
So we started with Roche's vision. So as many of you know that Roche is very committed to
embrace modernized solutions and open-source technology. So why is that? If you're working
in pharma or biotech or clinical research, you probably all experienced that during the
past few years, we are collecting more and more data in clinical trial research. And
those data include new data modalities such as genomic data, image data, as well as live
data from digital devices, et cetera. Those new data types, new data modalities brought
in large data volume as well as more complexity. So with that, all of us need to think harder
on how we bring more efficiencies into our data pipeline. Also, those new data modality
allow us to generate new insights by using more advanced methodologies from statistical
modeling or AI modeling.
So by embracing the open-source languages, it allow us to quickly access the latest and
greatest development from academia as well as from tech industry. So that allow us to
enable latest automation technology from other industries and also enable us to apply the
latest statistical methodology and AI methodology to generate insight from our clinical trial
data.
Also, many of us must experience that during the past 10 years or so for the newer grads
like the talent from out of school, they already knew our Python and Git from school
and they already have some experience in cloud computing. We realized that by enabling them
using those tools and skills that they learned from school, that largely improved their productivity
as well as job certification.
So with that, within Roche product development data science, our mission is to unlock the
full potential of data to accelerate innovative healthcare solutions for patients and society.
To meet that mission, one of our goals is to empower our data scientists to leverage
diverse tools and languages so our data scientists can use the right tool for the right project.
If you have been working with pharma or if you have been knowing pharma for the past
few years, you probably know that for clinical trial reporting, commercial software has been
dominating the space for the last decade or so. So switching to an open source ecosystem
is not easy and it's not happening overnight.
For myself, I joined Roche Genentech in 2016. And if I look back to the earlier years in
my career, I recall that at that time, commercial software has been heavily used for clinical
trial regulatory reporting. And when I joined the company, that was the time that we started
to collect more and more genomic data and image data. And for those exploratory analysis,
using genomic data and image data, R has been widely used as a default language for those
exploratory analysis. And at that time, internally, we had a R server being built, but primarily
for those exploratory analysis.
On the other side, there are so many people working on those new data modalities, etc.
So we have a very robust, very solid and increasing R user community within Roche.
So this user community also started to explore whether we can build R packages, POCs to support
the regulatory work. So there are a number of grassroots efforts trying to tackle different
problems for regulatory reporting, such as data processing or output generation.
In 2021, our leadership team under Roche Data Sciences decided that we need to have a holistic
strategy moving to open source and modernized solutions. So at that time, among the strategy,
there are two aspects under the strategy. One is the infrastructure strategy. We decided
that we want to have a validated modernized infrastructure that enables multiple languages.
This infrastructure is called Ocean. From the toolset perspective, our leadership team
decided that we want to productionize certain prioritized POCs to build our end-to-end pipeline
to enable the usage of open source software in clinical trial reporting.
From people's perspective, we started to have a more holistic plan for upscaling to enable
our people to learn R and Git if they are not familiar with those tools yet. And also
we embed the open source language expectation into our recruitment strategy.
2022 has been a busy year for execution. So internally, we have been busy to build our
infrastructure and also to productionize our toolset. We also established our validation
pipeline and validated the system and tools. And at the same time, we realized that because
the commercial software has been dominating the regulatory space for such a long time,
we realized that some of the cross-industry standards or cross-industry good practice
guidelines are around commercial software. And those standards and guidelines may not
be that friendly to the usage of open source software.
Therefore, a number of like-minded individuals from different companies, plus the strong
collaboration from FDA, we established a number of cross-industry working groups. And those
working groups focus on revisiting certain industry guidelines, industry standards, and
try to make them more compatible for the open source ecosystem. And also we identified gaps
and try to build open source solutions to bridge those technical gaps.
Within Roche, 2023 has been a very exciting year where we delivered an early version of
next-gen tools and systems. We welcomed a number of early adopter studies, including
Kinao's study, and she will share more on their experience as the early adopter for
our new tools and systems. And then based on the feedback from those early adopters,
we iterated our system and tools and then made enhancements.
This year, we are welcoming wider adoption to our new infrastructure. We have a very
bold goal this year. We want to migrate 90% of our molecule team users to the new system
called Ocean. Right now we are a little bit above 50%, so we are very optimistic of meeting
our goal for this year.
In March 2024, very excitingly, we had our first R-based NDA submission to health authorities,
and Jingyuan will share a little bit more on the journey of this first submission. And
right now within Roche, we are welcoming more studies adopting the RN2N. We are very excited
to see that more and more studies are using majority of open-source packages for their
clinical trial reporting.
So just a recap, as Phil mentioned, if you want to learn more about the infrastructure
setup of Ocean, there are packages that we use on the Pharmaverse or the Change Management
Strategy within Roche. Please feel free to check out our earlier presentation from January
2023. And for today, we will be focusing on Roche's first health authority submission
experience using RN2N. And with that, I will turn it to my colleague, Hinao, to share the
early adopter journey.
Thank you, Ning. Thank you, Ning, for the introduction and a recap of our next generation
journey. Before I dive into the early adopters journey, I'd like to briefly introduce who
we are and what we do. So at Roche, the PD Data Science is a diverse group of data scientists.
We are the end users of the next generation tools and systems. Our team consists of both
internal and external members, including experienced programmers and statisticians with a range
of expertise in SAS and R. We have varying levels of familiarity with clinical trial
data, with some members being multilingual and others either strong in R or SAS. The
majority of the team are seasoned SAS programmers who've upskilled in R with a pharma background.
Our daily work involves reporting on clinical trials and collaborating closely with key
stakeholders such as clinical science and the regulatory to generate robust scientific
evidence that supports the approval and the adoption of innovative medicines.
So with this background in mind, as an early adopter, we engaged in extensive strategic
discussions and planning. So I'd like to share insights into four key areas of focus, starting
with choosing the right study, which was an important consideration. We selected an oncology
study, a breast cancer trial, with a straightforward study design that would have standard analyses
typical of a breast cancer study. So there was familiarity with the programming specifications
and the reporting would align with existing Roche data standards and easy usage of available
open source packages. In addition, we carefully considered the study timelines to ensure that
there was enough upskilling time, allowing our team to enhance their proficiency with
the new tools while continuing to meet the study related activities. The second area,
by far the most intensive, is forming a data science team who are motivated and passionate
to upskill. This was really key to our success. Being an early adopter meant that there was
a lot to learn and not everything was perfect. The data science team members were not just
end users, but we would co-create with the developers to shape the future of our future
systems and tools. This mindset and seeing the bigger picture and wanting to be part
of this transformative journey was also key. Once we had a team, planning enough lead time
for upskilling was crucial. This can be challenging as the upskill need will vary depending on
the individual needs. This could cover anything from basic R, package specific training, Git
lab training, system related training, and learning new processes and new ways of working.
So allowing enough time to practice new tools and solutions on real clinical trial work
is essential as this is when the learning is really embedded. Having a good mix of R
programmers and those with clinical trial experience is crucial as it allows the team
to work as one and support each other in their respective learning journey.
The third area was planning the programming strategy. Some of us are diehard SAS programmers
for many years and it's what we're familiar with. So the transition to R for the first
time in a submission was a significant step. We therefore planned QC using SAS and this
dual approach gave us confidence in the accuracy of our analyses and also providing further
flexibility should we need the SAS version of the program in the future. And then finally
stakeholder management is vital. We actively engaged with our internal stakeholders to
align with our R submission plans to reassure them that the transition would not introduce
risks to our submission timelines. Additionally, we communicated with health authorities about
the R-based submission to foster a collaborative and a smooth submission process.
So overall, our learning experience has been positive. Initially, the learning curve felt
steep as there's a lot to grasp, a new system, a new environment, new tools, new processes.
However, over time within the team, we noticed a growing sense of confidence and familiarity
with the new tools leading to more timely delivery. As we progress, we're already observing
benefits in our second study, which is now reporting. The feedback from users using the
open source packages from Pharmaverse has also been positive. Users liked the structured
modular approach to programming as it helps navigate and debug code more easily. The
documentation is easy to follow and the template programs provide a consistent starting point
and are detailed enough for data scientists new to Pharma to be able to pick up.
Our programming strategy, next slide, please. Our programming strategy involves conducting
all the first-line programming in R. So on this slide, I'm highlighting the key packages
used. So for the SDTM mapping, so this is our industry standard for raw data we collect
and required by health authorities. We used Oak and Mint. For Adam, this is our industry
standard for analyses and additional derivations that are programmed using SDTM as a source.
In here, we've used Admiral and Admiral Onco. And in addition, we have a proprietary package
Admiral Roche, which bridges the gaps with our internal data standards. And then for
tables, listings, graphs, so these are the final outputs used in health authority documents.
We've used Chevron, TLG Catalog, our listings and our table. And for readable code for TLGs,
this was based on a subset of the key analyses defined in the study protocol. We've used
the TURN package. So all the packages are well-established, cross-collaborations solutions
from Pharmaverse, apart from Admiral Roche, of course. Our strategy was to leverage open-source
packages to enhance the transparency during the health authority review process. So enabling
the reviewers to directly access openly available open-source code and find the answers to their
questions should they wish to. So in addition to the end-to-end R submission, we also utilised
our Shiny apps using the Teal package. Two R Shiny apps were employed throughout the
study lifecycle, both before and after database lock, as well as during the submission process.
The apps proved valuable across various business contexts. The first R Shiny app was used informally
for study planning, and the second R Shiny app complemented our final static analyses
for the trial. And I'll provide more details of the apps in the upcoming slides.
So before database lock, whilst we're blinded to the treatment regimen, we use the event
tracking app for progressive free survival, PFS. This standard oncology endpoint measures
how long patients remain free from disease progression after treatment to assess the
effectiveness. So the number of PFS events to detect a significant difference between
two treatment groups is calculated. We then use the R Shiny app to predict when these
PFS events could occur, helping to determine the study timelines for the final analysis.
After study database lock, when the number of PFS events are achieved, we unblinded the
study and reran the final analyses to assess the treatment effect. And our second R Shiny
app was used during the clinical interpretation meetings with internal clinical science and
the regulatory team. The R Shiny app has also been beneficial for external requests
within Roche, such as those in case of novel insights from patent filing teams needing
to reproduce the endpoints on particular subsets of patients, and other teams who are involved
in accelerating patient access to our treatments, so involved also in pricing and reimbursements.
They have also used our app to QC additional analyses they receive from external vendors.
So internally, the app supported health authority questions by reproducing key analyses on subpopulations
or different baseline characteristics in real time. And in addition, we've used the event
tracking for overall survival, which is another common endpoint in oncology.
So this is our first R Shiny app, which we've used for event tracking for PFS and OS.
On this app, we can plug in the appropriate dates, the period for when we want to predict,
and then select the endpoint for reporting. And in the middle, you can see the tabs.
We can choose a statistical method of interest and also do whatever comparisons we wish.
The graph that's plotted shows the predicted dates and when the number of events could
be achieved. In addition, we have a table which provides the lower and upper bound
for the confidence intervals. The second R Shiny app is split by data domains
and displays key analyses of interest. So you've got demographics, baseline information,
efficacy, safety, exposure. In this example, you can see a table, an adverse event summary table.
And on the left, there is a filter that we can use to change up the medical concepts we want to
represent on the table. On the right, there's a filter, which allows us to filter the output
itself on a particular data point of interest. So for example, if you wanted to produce a summary
table of adverse events by region, we can then use the filtering on the right to achieve that.
So the usage of the apps has provided us the flexibility to replicate similar analyses,
enabling faster insights and better management of additional formal analyses, especially when
the team is under pressure to address health authority questions.
So this approach helps us to avoid generating unnecessary static outputs
and allows us to focus on analyses that are truly valuable.
So I hope this overview has provided an insight into the early adopters journey
and our experience of using open source R. I'll now hand over to Jingyuan Chen,
who is our data science filing team lead, who will go walk through the regulatory submission journey.
Yeah, thank you. Thank you, Hina. So after hearing the technical platform and the way of working in
our study team, we also want to share with you our submission journey. And then from here,
there are some points that we will cover in our story for today. So we would like to share with
you the way that we disclose the R information in our submission package. Also, we will unfold
the interactions with FDA for a submission in US, the communication with EMA for the submission in
EU, also the talks with MTA for the submission in China. So now let's start with the approach
that we have taken to include R in our electronic submission package.
As a part of our CDISC submission, we have ensured that the data contents and the formats
are consistent with the CDISC requirements as an industry-wide standards. The submitted datasets,
they are all in XPT format, just that they are generated through R. So if we compare with the
traditional package, we can see that the ICTM part remains the same. Just the dataset, they
were generated from ROAC. Then for the analysis dataset package, the ADAMS dataset also generated
into XPT format, but written from Admiral Roche, which is currently a proprietary package.
So in this way, the readable code for the ADAMS dataset will be written in Admiral Roche,
but the readable code for the outputs, like the tables, listings, or graphs, is based on the
open-source package of turn, so that the end users can easily install and replicate our results.
Then for the only difference, for the actual efforts, one is to further specify the details
of the R package that have been used in our analysis. And we included this part of the
content in the document, which we name as Program TOC, in addition to the reviewer's guide.
The other one is to include the validation reports for the key package that were used in
our analysis as the miscellaneous datasets to meet the requirements from FDA.
And then regarding to the validation reports, they are from our internal validation process,
which has been highly automated. And the recording for the presentation has been
available online, so if you're interested, please feel free to watch.
Now, let's take a look at how we construct the document of the Program TOC to include
the R information as a disclosure. So as a structure shown on the slide,
the description of the ESA package provides the general information about our study and
about our ESA package. Then the list of the analysis dataset programs and the outputs
programs lists the names of the variables for the datasets for analysis. So far, it mirrors
what is typically found in the traditional submission, ensuring the consistency and the
clarity. The final section for how to use the readable code is a place where we provide the
information about the R package that will have been used in our analysis. And we can see the
example from the next slide. Yeah, so based on the dynamic nature of R that the advanced feature
are updated to the package with the versioning up. So we also included the version for the package
along with the very brief description for the package that we used in the analysis.
So for example, in the proprietary package part, we listed the Miro-Roche since we used it
for generating our analysis dataset. We also used quite a few open source packages like
Miro and Tern and also we included the package version and a very brief description
which can be also taken as the justification of the use. Then in the appendix,
a very detailed instruction helps the reviewers to install the R environment and the package
along with the example of executing our submitted readable code. This is definitely an optional part
for the day-to-day R users, but to make our package to be more adaptable for the browser reviewers,
we still decided to include this part into our submission document.
Then in addition to the technical preparation, communication with the health authority is
another key to make the plan work. So for the communication for the submission in US,
we actually initiated the talk with FDA during our submission preparation period and the proposed to
use R and open source packages as a readable code in our briefing package. But the SAS program
actually was mentioned from FDA's response. But after sorting for a clarification regarding FDA's
statistical software clarifying statement and the acceptance of the dummy R submission
palette from our consortium, we received a positive response from FDA reviewing team
permitting us to proceed with the R along with appropriate justification as well as any resource
that could provide the evidence for the validation of the package or the functions will be used.
So by then, we're pretty happy to continue our journey with R and we also appreciate the
flexibility shown from agency's reviewing team. And then shortly after we submit our package,
we receive a request for the application orientation meeting and the technical work through.
Then in addition to the usual content to cover the datasets and the supporting documents in module 5,
we also include the list of the R related documents and their locations, such as the
file of a program TOC and the validation reports. To help ease some of the concern during the review,
we also point out the difference in the default options between SAS and R for the primary endpoint
analysis. So far, we haven't received any information request related to our R submission.
Then for the submission with EU, so actually we're pretty lucky to capture the tale of
the application window for the EU RAD data palette and EMA prominently confirmed their acceptance.
Then during the EU RAD data palette meeting, we presented the content very similar like the
FDA technical work through, but also include some additional details regarding the dataset contents
and some explanations for submitted documents as it is the first time to submit the data to EMA.
Yeah, so far, there is no technical related questions from EMA's end either.
Then moving on to the submission in China.
For the comparison, we aligned the communication with NMPA and the progress with FDA on the same
timeline. So initially, we raised the topic at the similar time, but we didn't get a clear response
regarding the use of R in our submission. To address this, ROSHU request a type 3 meeting
and provide more comprehensive supportive information from China, FDA, and the PMDA,
as well as the industry's use of R in the submissions. Then at the beginning of this year,
China and CDE write a written response stating that the biostatistics viewpoint is consistent
with FDA. So there's no specific software requirements for the analysis. But similarly,
as FDA, the response also mentioned that the analysis software and the corresponding functions
used should be validated. So we're pretty happy about the response, and we can utilize the ESA
package submitted to FDA and the EMA as the basis for the submission in China.
So now, when we're looking back to our submission journey, we feel that it has been both challenging
and valuable. Throughout the process of our new drug application submission using R from end to
end, we have found that the health authorities are open for our submissions and would like to know
that the package has been validated. To facilitate a smooth review process,
it is critical to secure agreement through the prior communication with the health authorities.
And then based on our case, we can see that the path for the end to end R submission has
been established, and it takes limited actual efforts for the applicants to implement the
practice using R with the open source and appropriately disclose the R-related information
in the submitted package. So that is the story of our R submission. We hope it has brought you
some inspiration. And now I will hand over to Ning for a broader view in the industry.
Thank you very much, Jingyan. So to wrap up, I will take the next several minutes just to share
some of our reflections of the past, the present, and also a little bit look into the future.
So starting with the plan within Roche, looking into the future. Right now, we are really,
really excited about this first R end to end submission to health authorities and really
happy to see that there hasn't been issues, technical issues so far. And as mentioned,
we are welcoming more and more studies using R end to end and using open source tools in clinical
trial reporting. So a big focus for us is further adoption of modernized platform and solution.
And then after the adoption or with the adoption, like another big emphasis from us is trying to
standardize and automate the automatable tasks by leveraging the modernized solutions and
technologies. Of course, we are not innovating for innovation's sake. We really want to improve
our productivity and then reduce manual work, repetitive work from our data scientists.
So if you're interested in learning more about our automation work and ideas, please feel free
to check out the pharmaverse packages, such as NAS for output generation, Shiny app generation,
and admiral for item data generation, and also the Citrix open source effort for the oak package
for acidity and mapping. There are a lot of automation features being embedded in those
solutions. And then also similar to everybody, we are pretty excited about the recent advancement
of AI and especially large library modeling. And we are actively exploring how to use AI
to assist programming, especially assist our code generation for clinical trial reporting.
If you want to learn more, next week, September 17th, there will be our pharma gen AI day.
It's a free virtual event. And in the event, Vincent Shen from our team will share our recent
work on inviting the generative AI to our code generation in clinical trial reporting.
And I also want to spend some time to share some reflections from myself to cover the journey
during the last five years or so. So I remember that the first time I got exposure to our code
submission to FDA was in 2020. At that time, Roche had a post-marketing commitment to FDA,
where we needed to do some analysis on a large volume of clinical trial data.
At that time, for majority of the analysis, we had been using SAS. But there was one particular
set of analysis we needed to use a pretty advanced methodology, in which case it was
hard to implement using SAS. But there were already existing R code from academia that we
can directly borrow. So we decided to use the R code to fulfill this post-marketing requirement,
and then to submit R code to FDA. And at that time, since we didn't have much experience of
our base submission, there were so many questions internally. For example,
our biggest question is around how can we make sure the FDA reviewers will be able to reproduce
the results, how to ensure that they can work in a similar computing environment as we do.
For example, two very simple questions are like how do we share the open source packages we use
so that FDA reviewer can use the same open source package. And also at that time for the advanced
methodology, we built an internal preparatory R package to wrap up the method. And then we want
to submit that package to FDA. And as you may know that for all the submission to FDA, you need to go
through the electronic gateway and how to submit the package through the electronic gateway.
So eventually we made it, we made a submission, but with a lot of question marks and we were not
quite sure that whether we follow the best practice for those submissions. So I remember
that in 2021, our team presented at the R pharma conference at Harvard at that time, it was an
in-person conference. And it was very interesting that we actually met many people from different
companies having similar experiences. People all started to use R for regulatory submission
or clinical trial reporting. And they realized that there are certain industry standard or
certain current practice that were not very friendly to the usage of R or other open source
languages. So in 2022, a number of cross-industry collaborations has been established with the
passionate people from different companies and with a very strong engagement from FDA.
I'm calling out two efforts here because those are the ones I'm most familiar with.
One is the R consortium, R submission working group, which is a collaboration with FDA
to showcase public available open pilots and to show how to submit using R and what are some
good practices and also try to identify gaps for R-based or open source language-based submission
to FDA. And the other one is called Pharmaverse. And as you heard from earlier presentations that
Pharmaverse is an open source collaboration effort trying to develop high quality technical
solutions to bridge any gaps in a clinical trial reporting space. So in 2022, it was really
exciting that we finished the pilot one from R consortium working group. We were able to
showcase how to use R for RBA submission and then engage with FDA review or to identify gaps,
etc. And then those gap has been feedback to Pharmaverse for further development of technical
solutions to bridge the gaps. In the following pilot one, there were a number of other pilots
in the past two years. In pilot two, we were able to collaborate with FDA to do a Shiny submission.
Pilot three, we submitted R code for Adam generation. And right now we are doing pilot
four, which is very exciting pilot that we will explore container web R technology.
So I want to say that all those cross-industry efforts shared so much learnings to the Roche
internal team. And I truly believe that those valuable insights really streamline our experience
in our first R into a new drug application submission earlier this year. And for example,
for those iterative learnings, just looking back to the two very simple questions we had during
the PMC days, I recall that when we did a first PMC submission within Roche for open source package,
we simply just provided crime links to FDA reviewers. However, we all know that this is
not optimal because crime may not point to the package version that we use. So during the R
consortium submission pilot number one, we have more in-depth discussion and then decided to use
and run snapshots, which can point to a specific version of our package. And also at that time,
we started to provide more detailed dependency graph and descriptions in the reviewers guidance.
In 2023, we realized that the RE has been pretty mature at that time. So we decided to explore the
usage of RE in pilot two, and that was really successful and largely simplified the submission
progress. And then right now we're exploring a container web R solution, which is really exciting
and I truly believe that that will further increase the productivity in the simplified
submission process. And in terms of a proprietary R package, as you may recall that for any
submission to FDA, all the files need to go through an electronic gateway. And when we did a
post-marketing commitment submission, we learned that for security reasons, the electronic gateway
only allow for plain data format, plain file format. So for the PMC submission, we needed to
manually convert all the package content into a plain file to do the submission. And then during
the RE Pharma conference, like we discussed with a number of people from different companies,
and our collaborators from Merck came up with this very smart idea to build an R package to
to automate the manual process. So under Pharmaverse, there was a R package developed
called PackageLite, which automated the manual process of file format conversion, and which
largely simplified the process of submitting proprietary R packages. And this PackageLite
solution also has been used in our Roche's first R end-to-end submission that Jingyuan mentioned.
And very excitingly, just several weeks ago, our R Consortium submission working group pilot 3 team
actually worked closely with FDA colleagues to test the feasibility of submitting zip file
for proprietary R packages, and it was very successful. So this further streamlined
submission process for proprietary R packages for the future. So looking into the future for those
cross-industry efforts, from my side, I just always feel very grateful and proud of being
this very active community. And then everybody is really passionate, really committed,
and really supportive to each other. I just found very lucky to be part of this journey,
where a lot of us believe that being together, by adopting open source spirit, ecosystem,
and tools, and by contributing back to open source and open collaboration, we are really
accelerating the bench-to-bedside treatment development as data scientists. And we also
truly believe that by automating the automatable tasks, and then reduce repetitive work, and then
reduce manual work, we will be able to unleash our clinical data scientists to focus on more
impactful work to really bring benefit to patients. So lastly, I just want to say thank you
for everybody who has been part of this cross-industry community, who has been contributing
to this cross-industry community, and I'm really grateful to have the opportunity to work with you
directly or indirectly. And if you are not a part of the community yet, you haven't been contributing
to the cross-industry efforts yet, it's never too late. I share several links over here, please feel
free to take a look at the working groups and identify the ones you may be interested in, and
just reach out. I'm sure everybody in the community will welcome your contribution. So with that, I
want to thank you for your attention, and we are happy to take any questions.
Awesome. Thank you so much to the entire Roche team for detailing their experience here. I know
so many people are very excited to hear about this journey that you've gone down. I can certainly
tell based on the fact that there are a lot of questions and comments that are coming in,
so we'll tackle a few of these here, and we're going to post a blog post after the webinar today,
so if we don't answer some of these questions, stay tuned and we'll get some information
out to the community after the webinar. So for the Roche team, to start things off,
here's the first most popular question. Has the FDA EMA described any barriers to entry
for end-to-end submitted pipelines? Example, for FastTrack or extensions and PDUFA EMA decision
dates. Yeah, maybe I can start to chime in here. Yeah, I don't wear any barriers. I won't say
any barriers are heard from. The clarification we request to FDA is the only time we discuss
about the programs. So actually, also FDA quickly just get agreement with us. We provide the
validation report and the justification, then it should be fine. And after the submission,
yeah, we didn't hear any, like, even situation similar like a barrier, and there's no follow-up
communication regarding the programs, the language that have been used. For the EMAs,
because we attend to the EU raw data pilot, so maybe from the nature about this new pilot,
we would hope the data would help a little bit for the EMA reviewing team to
maybe evaluate our packages. Yeah. Maybe also just to reiterate that,
I think Jian mentioned that from FDA, actually, there was a specific clarification statement
being published probably 10 years ago saying FDA is not requiring any specific software language.
And we also learned that basically, like, from FDA, I think they are experiencing similar talent
shift as us. So as you can imagine that for the FDA reviewers, that reviewers who graduated during
the past 10 years or so, they probably already knew R very well. So I don't see a real barrier
over there. But also, as Jian mentioned, I think communication is the key. It's possible that,
your program has been paired to a reviewer may prefer one of the languages. But from FDA
perspective, there is no requirement. And as Jian mentioned, that if we communicate early enough and
do the technical work through, from our experience, as long as we kind of front load them
with the information that they can prepare for that, there is no disadvantage of one
programming language over the other. Fantastic. Let's move to the next question
here. Did the regulatory body also require a QC done in SAS for the submission created in R?
Yeah. I think from our communication with the health authorities, we like plan to submit,
we didn't hear anything about, like, requirements for QC. I think maybe we should be expecting the
numbers, the analysis we include in our CSR or submit a document to be the accurate ones. So,
yeah, so we didn't meet something question like QC should be done in some certain way.
Yeah, I feel like, again, kind of like reflecting, kind of like citing the same
clarification statement from FDA, they are not asking for any specific programming language. So
I don't expect they will ask for QC, you know, specific programming language. Yeah.
This was just more, this was just more our comfort level. We wanted to,
you know, use SAS QC, as opposed to a regulatory requirement.
So a lot of questions coming in about package management. One of the popular ones there is,
how did you manage our package version control in-house?
Yeah, I want to say we, the three of us are not the expert, but I will try to answer that
so, yeah, internally, I think, like, similar to many other companies that we have those release
cycles. So we use container and, like, basically for each release of a container version, it comes
up with, like, later, latest, or, like, later, like, version of R itself and also R packages,
et cetera. If people are interested in learning more, actually, there was a R Consortium blog
posted earlier this year sharing some of the technical details from different
pharma companies in terms of release cycle, et cetera, that probably provide more information.
All right, we'll keep going here. Did you have to create new processes for
R submission, or were you able to keep the same processes that you had with SAS?
Yeah, so, yeah, it is our first time to do R submission, but generally, I would say the
processes stay the same. We didn't create anything, like, specific for the R submission,
but as we shared in our presentation, we just pick a way, like, we think proper and clear to disclose
the R information in our package. Yeah, totally agree. I feel like
Jian covered very well that basically, for example, for programming TLC, we add more
information because R is still new-ish, and arguably, basically, when we do a SAS submission,
we should also kind of show the reviewer how to install SAS, but we know they have experience
in that, so we skip that in previous submission. Yeah, but I will say that the process is largely
the same, but we try to be more specific just in case that this is new-ish to some of the reviewers.
Yeah. So, a lot of questions coming in about the tools that you used,
and I think it's probably important to mention that last year at R&Pharma, James Black gave
the keynote on the statistical computing environment, and also last year's webinar,
we went pretty deep into that, but maybe can you share a little bit more about
OCEAN and how you approach the statistical computing environment that you have?
Yeah. So, for OCEAN, basically, it is AWS-based infrastructure, and on OCEAN, we try to enable
both SAS and R, and also, presumably, Python if there are more Python users, et cetera. Yeah. So,
as mentioned, for computing environment, version controlling, we have been using containers. We
have different containers for SAS, for R, for different package versions, et cetera. And then
for code version control, we use GitLab. So, internally, we do have a GitLab instance,
and then for traceability, we use Git, and we also use SnakeMake for orchestration. Yeah.
All right. When you say end-to-end submissions, is it in the context with ECTD regulatory
submissions? Yes, yes. It is ECTD, yeah, generally for the electronic data submission.
Awesome. Another question, did Roche develop an internal validation process for the libraries,
Admiral Roche, for example, and can you share more details about this?
Yeah. So, as Jianyuan mentioned, we do have an internal pipeline, which is in large,
a large, very similar to the R validation hub white paper. Yeah. So, basically,
like for proprietary R packages, you need to go through the internal validation pipeline.
Fantastic. Always a popular topic, validation. Was the Shiny app itself submitted to the FDA?
Accessible to the FDA, or just an internal tool?
No. No. So, this was just an internal tool that was informally used by the project team,
but the app itself was not submitted. But we had the key analyses in the study report,
which reflected the same information as what was in the app.
Yeah. Yeah, for the Roche submission, we haven't been submitting the Shiny app to FDA. However,
like if you follow the R Consortium R submission group, the pilot tool actually tests out the
feasibility of submitting a Shiny app to FDA. So, if a sponsor prefers to submit a Shiny app
as a supplementary, like a utility tool, then it's feasible to submit, yeah.
I've got another question here. I'm going to also ask my own question as part of it. So,
the question says, are there any R packages to generate or validate the define.xml?
I'm not sure. At least in our journey, we didn't use from R to generate our define. So, as we said,
we didn't do anything like a very big deviator from the traditional way we're doing our
submission packages. We just like choose the proper way to disclose the R information in our
package. Yeah. I think this is the first time I also saw Mint as part of the Oak workflow.
What is the Mint package?
So, the Mint package has, it's a web application where we can define the metadata for the mapping
instructions for, yeah, mapping instructions. So, that was used by the SDTM team.
And maybe, you know, you can also, I feel like that's also part of our automation,
like, automation effort. So, for Mint, I believe that we simplify the mapping for standard data
sources, right? Maybe you can share a little bit more. Yeah, yeah. I mean, so quite a lot of,
we have obviously a metadata repository. So, quite a lot of the standard mappings are
kind of available already. But it's looking at each study and seeing what's non-standard. So,
that's where the effort lies, where you need to go into the application and add in sort of
non-standard mappings in there. The majority of the, sort of, the SDTMs are pretty standard.
Most of those mappings are kind of following, you know, sort of ROSH data standards.
So, the effort there is really focusing on non-standard pieces.
Awesome. A lot of questions about the internal Admiral package. And so, someone's asking,
I believe around that package, how was the proprietary R package actually shared with
the health authorities? Yeah, for our case, when we prepare for our package, we actually
use the package light package. As Ning mentioned, it's a smart package, help us to translate the
content of that package into a text file. So, we just included a text file together with our
readable code in our submission package. And in our, the program TOC, the appendix,
the program TOC, the appendix, we include a very detailed instruction of how to make use of the
text file from the end user's point and install that at the user's environment.
And for future submissions, please check out the pilot number three,
Repo3. So, right now, I believe you can use zip file for your proprietary R package.
Got a couple of more questions, two minutes, we'll see how far we get. How are packages,
Admiral or O packages useful for non-CDISC standard data?
Yeah, I'm not very sure about it. I think both O and the MIRA kind of appear recently and
the recent submissions to health authority should be OCDISC. So, yeah, I'm probably not so very,
yeah, clear. All right. Or we can get back to you. Yeah, we can ask,
do some research and get back to this question. For sure, for sure. So, I'm going to ask my own
question. I just thought it was very interesting. I love the slide that said you're at 50%
in training and adoption and supporting the transition,
that the goal is 90%. What's the plans to help you get to that 90%?
I think we are definitely heading there. So, we have a pretty comprehensive plan,
like a month by month, we plan out like who are the study teams to be onboarded
and what support they need. And for each team, actually, we assign a onboarding coach who are
most of them are early adopters or users who are already on the new platform. And I think one thing
I really appreciate is that I see really, really strong passion from the user community. I know
like whenever we move to a new system or new tools, the initial phase is always bumpy,
like there's always gaps we didn't identify, et cetera. But I feel like just data scientists are
so eager to have access to modernized platform and modernized solutions. So,
we actually have a really, really collaborative community within Roche. So, I'm really optimistic.
Well, that does it. Takes us into the 1 p.m. Eastern Standard Time. Thank you so much to all
of you. I know the community has really enjoyed this, so many great positive comments coming in
the chat box. I just want to thank you so much and hope you all have wonderful afternoons. And
any last-minute comments or questions? Thanks, everyone, for joining us.
All right. Well, thank you, everybody, for joining. We'll post the blog post with some
other Q&A after this. And